JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight": The
presidential
candidates go looking for votes
in battleground
states.
We hear from Trump's campaign
manager and
a top Clinton supporter.
Then, we explore how women
experience sexual
harassment and assault in this
country, as
Donald Trump's lewd remarks on a
tape spark
a national conversation.
And how ordinary moss is helping
scientists
detect unusually high levels of
air pollution
in a major city in the Pacific
Northwest.
SARAH JOVAN, U.S. Forest
Service: Moss is
kind of like the underdog of the
plant world,
in the sense that people tend to
not really
know what it is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now that there
are less than
four weeks left in the
presidential campaign,
the candidates are zeroing in on
a handful
of key states.
Donald Trump kept his focus on
Florida today.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I love this state.
As you know, I'm here all the
time.
In 27 days, we're going to win
Florida and
we're going to win back the
White House.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: He appeared in
Ocala and later
in Lakeland, his third stop in
two days in
a state he badly needs in order
to become
president.
A federal judge there this
morning extended
the voter registration deadline
by six days,
due to damage from Hurricane
Matthew.
Trump's comments about women in
that 2005
video have sparked the deepest
divide yet
in the Republican Party this
election.
A USA Today survey found that 87
out of 331,
or 26 percent of GOP elected
governors and
members of Congress, do not
support him.
His running mate, Indiana
Governor Mike Pence,
urged conservative Christians at
Virginia's
Liberty University to stand by
the ticket.
GOV.
MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
For the sake of the sanctity of
life, for
the sake of the Second Amendment
to the Constitution
of the United States, for the
sake of all
of our God-given liberties, we
must decide
here and now, in the great
Commonwealth of
Virginia, that the next
president to make
appointments to the Supreme
Court of the United
States will be President Donald
Trump.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last night in
North Carolina,
President Obama questioned
Republicans and
Christians who accept Trump,
despite his comments
in the "Access Hollywood" video
about groping
women.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The fact that now you have got
people saying,
well, we strongly disapprove, we
really disagree,
we find those comments
disgusting, but we're
still endorsing him...
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: ... we still think
he should
be president, that doesn't make
sense to me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
was in Pueblo,
Colorado, today, another
battleground state,
trying to build on her lead in
most national
polls.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I know that, if people turn out,
I know, if
people show up, we're going to
win and we're
going to be able to do
everything I have talked
about.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: As Clinton
attempts to maintain
her lead, Trump is fighting to
keep Republicans
behind him, as early voting
picks up and Election
Day draws closer.
In the day's other news: The
death toll from
Hurricane Matthew climbed to 20
in North Carolina.
Meanwhile, communities braced
for another
wave of damage, as floodwaters
began surging
downriver.
Governor Pat McCrory said areas
already hit
by flooding will likely be
inundated with
more water, and he pleaded with
residents
to stay clear.
GOV.
PAT MCCRORY (R), North Carolina:
Just during
the past three days, we're
averaging two fatalities
a day, almost all of them due to
drowning.
Stay away from the water.
Whether you're walking or riding
in a car,
do not get near the water.
It will kill you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hurricane Matthew
has now claimed
the lives of at least 36 people
in the United
States.
Meanwhile, a U.S. Navy warship
packed with
humanitarian aid is on its way
to another
flood-ravaged area, Haiti.
Nearly 500 people there died in
the hurricane.
Another million more are in need
of assistance.
In Afghanistan, the Islamic
State claimed
responsibility for an attack on
a Shiite mosque
in Kabul that killed at least 18
people.
Officials say a gunman opened
fire on worshipers
Tuesday night as they were
observing Ashura,
one of the holiest days for Shia
Muslims.
First-responders arrived on the
scene as witnesses
tended to the victims.
MAN (through translator): A lot
of people
were killed.
Later, around midnight, we heard
another explosion.
It was like a war, and people
were scared.
It was a horrible situation, and
unbearable
for us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A separate
bombing targeted
Ashura ceremonies in Northern
Afghanistan
today.
At least 14 people died, and 26
others were
wounded.
There was no immediate claim of
responsibility.
A U.S. Navy destroyer was
targeted today by
at least one missile launched
from rebel-held
territory in Yemen.
It is the second such incident
in four days.
The USS Mason was operating just
north of
a strait between Yemen and
Africa.
It wasn't hit or damaged.
Houthi rebels have been
suspected in both
failed attacks.
The Pentagon said that it will
respond -- quote
-- "at the appropriate time" and
in the appropriate
manner.
In Syria, an airstrike on the
rebel-held side
of Aleppo left at least 15
people dead today.
It came a day after Russian jets
resumed heavy
bombing in the city.
Today's attack hit a busy
market, leveling
several shops and buildings.
Resolving the Syrian conflict
will be at the
top of the agenda when U.S.
Secretary of State
John Kerry meets with his
Russian counterpart
on Saturday.
JOHN KIRBY, U.S. Assistant
Secretary of State:
I can't sit here and promise you
that it's
going to result in a new
approach, a new option,
a new framework, a new program.
I can't tell you that it's going
to -- we're
going to be able to come out of
this meeting
certain that a cessation of
hostilities can
be had.
But I can promise you, and I can
assure you
that the secretary is going into
this meeting
with that as his objective.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The meeting in
Switzerland
will be the first face-to-face
contact between
the men since Washington broke
off diplomatic
talks with Moscow earlier this
month.
There is word that Wells Fargo
CEO John Stumpf
is retiring, effective
immediately.
It follows revelations that bank
employees
opened millions of fake
accounts.
On Wall Street, stocks were
mixed after minutes
from the Federal Reserve's
September meeting
supported expectations that an
interest rate
hike could come in December.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 15
points to close around 18144.
The Nasdaq fell more than seven,
and the S&P
500 rose two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
I talk with
Donald Trump's campaign manager,
with a top
Clinton supporter, and with the
vice presidential
nominee of the Libertarian
Party; the national
conversation on the sexual abuse
and harassment
women face; and how studying
moss led Portland,
Oregon, to discover high levels
of air pollution.
We return now to the race for
the White House,
and we begin with Donald Trump's
campaign
manager, Kellyanne Conway.
Kellyanne Conway, welcome back
to the program.
Let me start with the average of
all the national
polls right now.
You're very familiar with it,
Hillary Clinton
five to seven points ahead.
Donald Trump hasn't been leading
nationally
since the end of July.
You have state polls showing
where he's losing
support even in states that are
reliably Republican.
Where do you see this race right
now?
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Campaign
Manager:
So, the race right now is one
where we are
going to try to start making up
the gap, Judy,
in terms of paid advertising.
We have been out-spent 7-1, 10-1
in some places
and even more.
And we now have -- we have
budgeted for a
significant ad buy, particularly
in the 10
or 11 states where we see this
race headed.
That would be a variety of
states that President
Obama carried twice.
We're trying to pierce that
Democratic blue
wall, which is a very real
concern for any
Republican presidential
candidate.
And it's also a matter of
candidate investment,
where Governor Pence and Mr.
Trump are spending
their days.
That will also be focused on the
10 or 11
swing states.
And then, finally, it's the nuts
and bolts.
It's the brass tacks.
It's always been, but just at a
fever pitch
now, working with the RNC to
beef up and build
out our ground game, our data
operation, our
field staff.
It's been a fairly impressive
collaboration.
And now we're just -- we're
moving people
around, some of our talented
folks in states
that we look like we will win or
that Mrs.
Clinton will win, and we're
deploying people
into those 10 or 11 states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, The Wall
Street Journal
reporting today that, in effect,
your campaign
has given up on getting voters
beyond the
base of the Republican Party,
that you're
focusing on that base, on
getting them out
and on depressing voters who are
committed
to Hillary Clinton.
Is that the strategy you have
decided on?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: No, that would
actually
not be a winning strategy.
Of course, each of the
candidates has to excite
their base.
And Donald Trump's done a much
better job
of that.
He owns the enthusiasm, the
momentum, the
big crowds that you see every
day, Judy, at
these rallies, at these forums.
And then he also is trying to
get those independents.
So, the goal for us is to
increase the number
of Republicans who are
supporting Mr. Trump.
In the NBC News/Wall Street
Journal poll,
he's up at about 85 percent.
So is Mrs. Clinton.
Get that over 90 percent.
Get more of those independents,
of course,
women, millennials, some of
those harder-to-reach
audiences.
But also we do see -- we do see
that Hillary
Clinton's having a hard time
enthusing her
base.
She has a very popular president
and first
lady out, the Obamas out there,
there trying
to campaign for her, but so far
their popularity
has not been transferable to
her.
You read all these articles
about the difficulty
her campaign is having enthusing
some of the
Obama coalition for her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But don't you
also have a problem
with your base?
You now have a number of
prominent Republicans
who are saying they're not going
to support
Donald Trump both in Congress
and among the
governors.
Isn't this a serious drag now on
the campaign?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: We have to
take the case
directly to the voters,
including in the states,
Judy.
And I would take note that, just
today, you
have a number of them, senators,
saying, well,
OK, I changed my mind, I
actually am going
to vote for him, because what
happened in
the case of some of them, I
guess Joe Heck
in Nevada, Deb Fischer in
Nebraska, I saw
John Thune in North Dakota, the
fourth highest
ranking senator for the
Republican Party majority
in Washington, they all said,
well, yes, we're
going to support him, somewhat
side -- taking
a side -- a step backward from
what they had
said over the weekend.
So I think what happens is, they
hear from
some of their voters saying,
look, we want
you to support the presidential
nominee, and
we want you to run as a ticket.
So -- but, look, Donald Trump
just has to
take his case directly to the
voters, including
in states where the elected
officials say
that they're not going to
endorse him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what is --
what we know
has turned off not only
Republican elected
officials, but traditionally
Republican voters,
is that video/audiotape with
"Access Hollywood,"
where we heard Donald Trump
speaking of grabbing
a woman sexually.
We heard him speaking about
trying to have
sex with a married woman, about,
because you
are a celebrity, you can get
away with it.
You, Kellyanne Conway, have
children yourself.
Were you offended by that?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Yes.
It wouldn't matter if I have
children or not.
It actually doesn't matter if
I'm a woman
or not.
Of course I was offended.
I agree with Donald Trump and
Melania Trump
and Mike Pence on this.
The comments are offensive and
reprehensible.
Nobody had been asked to defend
them, and
nobody should.
I'm glad that Donald Trump
apologized.
And I was with him when it was
revealed that
this tape existed.
And I saw immediately a man who
you saw publicly
apologizing, asking for
forgiveness, and then
also saying that he will resolve
to go forward
and continue to fight this
election on the
issues that he's been fighting
all along.
We don't -- he doesn't agree
with President
Obama and Hillary Clinton that
ISIS is in
retreat and they're the J.V.
team and our
-- quote -- "determined
enemies."
He doesn't agree with handing
over three or
four Supreme Court justice
nominations to
Hillary Clinton or the domestic
economy, where
she has promised to raise taxes
and increase
regulations.
He doesn't agree with her
position on Obamacare,
which has not helped millions of
Americans
it was intended to help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, these
stories, though,
continue to come, The Washington
Post reporting
today about Donald Trump doing
an interview
with Howard Stern in 2005
talking about walking
in on the contestants at a Miss
USA Pageant
where they weren't dressed.
And he said, "I can do that
because I own
the pageant."
Another story about -- today
about -- in the
late 1990s, walking in on
contestants at a
Miss Teen USA Pageant.
How much more of this do you
think is there
out there?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: I don't know.
But I do know that, to be fair,
because I
just never -- frankly, you just
don't see
the equal coverage,
respectfully.
I do know what Hillary Clinton
was doing all
those decades also.
And she's been lying then and
she is lying
now.
I mean, the idea that we're not
going to talk
about what she was doing in the
1990s, including
naming and shaming these women
in her husband's
lives, the way she treated women
all then,
the way she lied about
Whitewater, the way
she lied about being under
sniper fire in
Bosnia, the way she lied to the
Benghazi families,
I mean, she has a real veracity
problem, Judy.
And we know that voters believe
honesty and
trustworthiness is also a
qualification for
president.
And many voters don't think she
is qualified
or she is fit, based on her
record as secretary
of state, based on her
unremarkable record
as a United States senator, and
based on her
casual relationship with the
truth.
And I think it's important for
us to talk
about both candidates and their
vulnerabilities.
We just simply don't see it from
a sheer content
analysis day by day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quick last
question.
A voter at a Mike Pence rally
yesterday said,
"If Hillary Clinton wins this
election, we
need to have a revolution."
He said, "No, that's wrong, we
don't."
How does Donald Trump see that?
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Well, I agree
with Governor
Pence.
And I'm so glad that he had the
presence of
mind to say that, meaning,
sometimes, you're
in a rally, you don't really
hear what people
say completely.
I'm so glad Governor Pence
immediately told
her no.
I echo that.
And I will tell you that Donald
Trump has
said time and again that he
wants to win,
he wants to be the president of
the United
States to enact all this change
and disrupt
Washington, Judy, but if he
doesn't win, he
will support Hillary Clinton as
the president.
We all will.
We love this country.
And our love for the country and
its people
transcends partisan politics.
That's very clear.
But I will tell you, over the
next four weeks
or so, less now, we will be
fighting, leaving
it all on the field, to win this
election.
And if Hillary Clinton prevails,
then we will
respect that and we will work
with her as
president of the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kellyanne Conway,
who is the
campaign manager for Donald
Trump, we thank
you very much.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Thank you,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
to a supporter
of Secretary Clinton.
Guy Cecil is the co-chair and
chief strategist
at Priorities USA.
It's a Democratic political
action committee,
or a super PAC.
Guy Cecil, thank you for being
with us.
GUY CECIL, PRIORITIES USA
ACTION: Thanks for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Kellyanne
Conway says there
is a clear path for Donald Trump
to win this
election.
They're going after the, she
said, 10 or 11
states that Barack Obama won,
states that
they think they can peel away
from the Democrats.
Do you see that?
GUY CECIL: I don't.
I think it's incredibly
difficult, for a couple
of reasons.
Number one, when you take a look
at the battleground
states, they are states that are
rich in diversity,
high percentages of
African-Americans, of
young people, of Hispanics.
And it's going to be very
difficult for Donald
Trump to make a case to those
voters.
It's also true that, in
battleground states
like Virginia and Colorado and
North Carolina,
a higher percentage than the
national average
are white college-educated
voters.
And for the first time in 40
years, a Democrat
is actually leading among those
voters in
the polls.
And so there are quite a few
paths for Hillary
to become the nominee.
She starts out with an Electoral
College advantage,
and the reality is, there is a
very narrow
path, almost impossible path for
Donald Trump
to be successful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She did make the
point that
there is a lack of enthusiasm,
though, on
the Democratic side for Hillary
Clinton.
You don't see voters as excited
as they were
for Barack Obama.
In fact, I was in Georgia two
weekends ago,
in North Carolina this week.
You don't see -- you certainly
do see support
for Hillary Clinton.
Some of it is not as
enthusiastic.
How do you deal with that?
GUY CECIL: I do think some of
that is changing.
I mean, Hillary was at a rally
in Ohio just
this week where 18,000 people
showed up.
But, more concretely, when you
take a look
at states where there are
absentee ballots
or early voting or voter
registration still
going on, you actually see the
results of
increased enthusiasm among
Democrats.
For example, there's been a
significant increase
among African-Americans pulling
an absentee
ballot request in North
Carolina.
For the first time in history,
there are more
registered Democrats in Colorado
than there
are Republicans.
And we're seeing in Ohio today
lines in early
vote locations that are in
typically Democratic
areas.
So, I know that there was a
hangover from
both primaries, but, as we get
closer to the
election and our voters are
starting to tune
in, you're seeing the enthusiasm
gap drop
between the two campaigns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Guy Cecil, is
there a danger,
though, at this point of
overconfidence?
We're reading today that Hillary
Clinton,
that her campaign is putting
resources or
planning to put resources into
traditionally
red states like Georgia, like
Utah.
Is that a sign -- could that be
too much confidence
about how this election is
going?
GUY CECIL: No.
Look, if you look at the
operations that are
actually on the ground in the
battleground
states, the Clinton campaign has
it covered.
It doesn't mean there is not
more work to
do.
But there was a New York Times
story just
this morning that said that
Republican polls
actually show Hillary Clinton
leading today
in Georgia.
I expect we will see polls show
her leading
in Arizona.
And so, from my perspective, we
should be
expanding the map as
significantly as possible.
And I do think that's in marked
contrast to
where the Republicans are
currently playing.
They are defending a lot of
territory they
absolutely must win, states like
Utah, for
example.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You don't think
there is a
danger of overconfidence?
GUY CECIL: No.
I think Democrats typically
operate in one
condition, and that is abject
panic about
the election.
And I suspect, even though we're
having a
pretty good week, that it will
continue that
way through the next four.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about
something else,
Guy Cecil, that Kellyanne Conway
brought up?
And that is, when I asked her
about the tape
involving, the audiotape, the
"Access Hollywood"
-- involving Donald Trump, she
brought up
what she described and what many
describe
as a lack of honest on the part
of Hillary
Clinton, about -- she talked
about naming
and shaming women when it comes
to Bill Clinton's
infidelities back in the 1990s
and since,
about Whitewater.
She brought up a number of
things.
How much of a liability is that
for Hillary
Clinton?
I mean, the polls show
trustworthiness continues
to be an issue for her.
GUY CECIL: Sure.
Well, first of all, I think you
can look at
the past as prologue.
Many of these same attacks were
tried against
Bill Clinton.
And 1998 was the only year that
a second-term
president didn't actually lose
seats in Congress.
Why?
Because these attacks don't
work.
And the idea that you would
attack a woman
for the mistakes of her husband
and that the
messenger of that attack would
be Donald Trump,
who has spent the last
year-and-a-half lying
to the American people, I think
it's just
not a realistic argument.
And Trump is certainly not the
right messenger
to carry that argument to the
American people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, meantime,
we have what
appears to be a daily or
every-other-day leaking
from -- a publication of e-mails
from WikiLeaks
from the Clinton campaign, from
-- and the
most recent ones, John Podesta,
the campaign
chairman.
We saw some of the language
today had to do
with a Clinton campaign staffer
communicating
with people at the Department of
Justice about
the e-mail -- Hillary Clinton's
e-mail problem
while she was secretary of
state, language
about Catholics, evangelical
Christians.
Isn't this a constant drag on
the campaign's
ability to get its story out?
GUY CECIL: Well, I think it's
important to
take one step back on this
point, which is
that you have a foreign
government that is
trying to interfere with our
elections, number
one.
Number two, the campaign, nor
the press has
actually validated that these
particular e-mails
are entirely true.
And so I think it's important to
look at this
with some degree of caution.
However, even if you were to say
that they
were all true, the conversations
over e-mail
between campaign staffers pales
in comparison
to what we have seen revealed
about Donald
Trump just over the course of
the last two
weeks.
Hillary Clinton rolled out this
week a plan
that would increase credits for
child care,
that would allow poor people to
access child
care so they can get out of
their condition
and find jobs.
At the same time, Donald Trump
is talking
about Bill Clinton, talking
about Paul Ryan,
talking about things that the
American people
don't care about.
So, ultimately, I believe Donald
Trump will
never allow this election to be
anything other
than a referendum on Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Guy Cecil, the
chief strategist
at Priorities USA, thank you for
being here.
GUY CECIL: Thanks for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Appreciate it.
And two -- we know two former
governors make
up another ticket, the
Libertarian ticket,
in this year's election, Gary
Johnson of New
Mexico, and his running mate,
Bill Weld of
Massachusetts.
I spoke with Governor Weld a
short time ago,
and began by asking if he sees a
realistic
path to the presidency for their
ticket.
BILL WELD, Libertarian Vice
Presidential Candidate:
Well, the only way we could run
the table
is if we somehow become catnip
for the national
news media in the everyday saga
of reporting
on the presidential election and
our role
in that.
And we're doing everything we
can to get our
name recognition up from 35
percent to 60
percent.
We think, if that happens, our
ballot position
might go up to 20, 25 percent.
And, at that point, we would be
very dangerous,
because we would be the ticket
with the momentum.
That's a long putt, but we are
honor-bound
to undertake that.
It's a fascinating election all
around.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That, it is.
But you're acknowledging it's a
long shot.
BILL WELD: Sure.
Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you said,
Governor Weld,
last week to The Boston Globe
that you are
going to be focusing exclusively
for the rest
of this campaign on criticizing
Donald Trump,
making sure voters know what
Donald Trump
stands for.
That sounds like you're
campaigning to make
sure he doesn't get elected more
than you
are to make sure Gary Johnson
gets...
BILL WELD: I'm not sure I used
the word exclusively,
but I said that he would have my
full attention.
And he does.
And now, after the events of the
last few
days with the tape involving
women coming
out, that kind of focuses a lot
of people's
attention on that aspect of Mr.
Trump's character,
if you will.
And it suggests to us that, if
we want to
go hunting where the ducks are,
the softer
votes may be the Republican
votes that, to
this point, have been adhering
to Mr. Trump.
But the fact of the matter is,
Mr. Trump has
set his sights absolutely
against everything
the Republican Party
historically has stood
for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it sounds
like, in reading
what you have been saying last
week and before
that, that, push comes to shove,
Hillary Clinton
is much more acceptable to you,
if there can't
be a Libertarian in the White
House, than
Donald Trump.
BILL WELD: Yes, I have been
trying not to
answer that question, because
you don't want
to be seem to be folding your
tent.
And Gary and I are in this to do
everything
we can, including win it if
fortune could
-- should favor us.
But, no, I have made no bones
about the fact
from the get-go that I think
there is a big
difference between Donald Trump
and Hillary
Clinton.
Never said otherwise.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you have said
that she's
the most experienced person
maybe to ever
seek the presidency.
BILL WELD: Well, I said that I'm
not sure
there's anybody more qualified
-- and I should
have said on paper -- than Mrs.
Clinton.
I think I went on to say I would
still vote
for Gary Johnson because of the
decisions
he would make in areas like the
budget, fiscal
policy and military policy.
But, yes, she's certainly
qualified, after
eight years of Senate and four
years as secretary
of state.
To suggest that she's not
well-qualified by
position and background to be
president of
the United States is to
misstate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking of
qualification,
your running mate has gotten a
lot of attention
over the last few weeks with
some statements,
misstatements about foreign
policy, leading
the experts to observe that
either he wasn't
prepared or just not
knowledgeable about foreign
policy.
Did you talk to him after these
incidents?
BILL WELD: Oh, sure.
I mean, Gary feels terrible
about making the
fluffs, because he feels he's
let people down.
But I know for a fact that, when
he didn't
copy on the word Aleppo, it's
because he wasn't
aware that it was even a place
name.
He thought Mike Barnicle was
asking him about
some acronym.
And, you know, at the end of the
day, prior
to that incident, he had been
very knowledgeably
conversing about Syria policy
and pretty much
nailed it, I thought, too many
rebel groups.
You know, watch out, or you are
going to have
unintended consequences.
We have to do a cease-fire with
the Russians.
And then that's exactly what
happened.
And, of course, it blew up
because of the
bombings.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Boston Globe
also reported
last week, Governor Weld, that
you talked
about wanting to be in a
position to rebuild
your former home, the Republican
Party, after
this election.
BILL WELD: I think it would be
very interesting
to be a part of the dialogue,
with my Libertarian
hat on, as to what's going to
happen after
the Republican Party splits in
two.
I think there is going to be a
schism there
either in this cycle or before
the next cycle,
just as what happened to the
Whig Party in
the 19th century.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what do you
make of what's
going on?
I mean, right now, the speaker
of the House
of Representatives, a
Republican, Paul Ryan,
is saying he won't campaign for
Donald Trump.
BILL WELD: Well, that shouldn't
be a surprise.
I mean, after the -- after the
last election
of 2012, Reince Priebus and Paul
Ryan and
all the party elders got
together and said,
OK, next time, we have got to
focus on the
message of free trade, outreach
to the Hispanic
community, much more inclusion
of women, much
more attention to communities of
color and
communities of every other
ethnicity.
How much of that has Donald
Trump done?
Nothing.
He's done 180 degrees the
opposite.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what do you
think happens
to the Republican Party if
Donald Trump...
(CROSSTALK)
BILL WELD: I think the Trump
wing goes the
way of the Know-Nothing Party of
the 1850s,
which, like the Trump wing, was
founded on
anti-immigrant fervor or
prejudice and conspiracy
theories and violent rallies.
It looks like a carbon copy of
the old Know-Nothing
Party.
And what happened -- the
interesting question
is, what happens to the rest of
the party?
Can it kind of come to its
senses and rally
and elect Abraham Lincoln three
years later,
which is what happened when the
Whigs split
up?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Whatever happens
on Election
Day, do you see this country
coming together
after this election?
BILL WELD: It is going to be
tough, particularly
with Mr. Trump threatening to --
threatening
Mrs. Clinton with jail.
I mean, I think she's enough of
a big person
so that she certainly would make
an effort
to have the country come
together.
I have no doubt of that.
It might be a little bit harder
to say you
should go on bended knee to the
Donald.
I don't see that happening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But just last
question, you're
all out for the Libertarian
ticket until Election
Day?
BILL WELD: Yes, I am.
I mean, I will have comments on
this and that.
We may even rent a hall.
But it's going to be a very
interesting four
weeks.
And I think we will have an
impact.
And my hope is, we will have an
impact on
those Republican voters and be
able to peel
them away from Mr. Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former Governor
Bill Weld of
Massachusetts, the vice
presidential nominee
of the Libertarian Party, we
thank you.
BILL WELD: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Online, take a
detailed look
at the trend lines shaping up in
the swing
states.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Almost a week after its release,
the leaked
tape of Donald Trump boasting of
sexually
harassing and assaulting women
continues to
raise issues that go well beyond
presidential
politics.
John Yang has that story.
BILLY BUSH, "Access Hollywood":
Yes.
The Donald has scored!
Whoa, my man!
JOHN YANG: The impact of this
2005 tape of
Donald Trump and NBC personality
Billy Bush
has gone far beyond politics.
It's sparked a national
discussion over misogyny
and sexual assault.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I better use some Tic Tacs, just
in case I
start kissing her.
You know, I'm automatically
attracted to beautiful
-- I just start kissing them.
It's like a magnet.
I just kiss.
I don't even wait.
And, when you're a star they let
you do it.
You can do anything.
BILLY BUSH: Whatever you want.
DONALD TRUMP: Grab them by the
(EXPLETIVE
DELETED).
(LAUGHTER)
DONALD TRUMP: I can do anything.
JOHN YANG: While Trump
apologized for the
remarks during Sunday night's
debate, he also
tried to dismiss them.
DONALD TRUMP: Certainly, I'm not
proud of
it.
But this is locker room talk.
JOHN YANG: He also raised
decades-old accusations
against his opponent's husband,
former President
Bill Clinton.
DONALD TRUMP: Mine are words,
and his was
action.
His was what he's done to women.
JOHN YANG: Hours before, the
Republican nominee
appeared with women who have
accused Bill
Clinton of sexual misconduct.
None of those accusations, it
should be said,
have ever resulted in any
criminal charges.
This all comes amid a heightened
sensitivity
about sexual assault and
violence.
There's the pending trial of
comedian Bill
Cosby on sexual assault charges
in Pennsylvania
and other similar allegations
against him.
And there was the furor over the
six-month
jail sentence handed earlier
this year to
Brock Turner, a Stanford
University swimmer
who was convicted of sexually
assaulting an
unconscious woman.
Some Trump supporters have
suggested that
the reaction to the Trump tape
is overblown.
SCOTT BAIO, Actor: And ladies
out there, this
is what guys talk about when
you're not around.
So, if you're offended by it,
grow up.
JOHN YANG: But the tape prompted
an avalanche
of reaction on social media.
Author Kelly Oxford shared her
own sexual
assault experience, and
encouraged others
to do the same.
Her callout swiftly went viral.
More than 30 million people have
either left
a response or visited her
Twitter page since
Friday night, a nationwide
catharsis of painful
experiences.
And now for more on this, Kelly
Oxford joins
us now from Burbank, California,
along with
Anita Hill, who accused Supreme
Court Justice
Clarence Thomas of sexual
harassment during
his confirmation hearings.
Hill is now a law professor at
Brandeis University.
And here in the studio, Mike
Wise, senior
writer for ESPN's "The
Undefeated."
Kelly, let me start with you.
As I look through your Twitter
feed, you have
now got the hashtag #NotOkay for
people telling
their stories.
It really is quite amazing to
see the volume
and kinds of experiences people
are talking
about.
What has struck you about this
response?
KELLY OXFORD, Author,
"Everything Is Perfect
When You're a Liar": You know,
people have
desperate need to discuss this
topic.
And I created the hashtag
#NotOkay because
I knew the volume of people
coming in would
be extremely large.
So, I'm not shocked by how many
people are
coming forward.
I think a lot of women discuss
this with each
other.
A lot of women have sexual
assault and rape
in their families, their
grandmothers, their
mothers, their aunts, their
sisters.
And the Internet is a place
where everybody
has a voice and everybody can
contribute.
And it's happening.
And it's happening right now.
It's been five days and women
are continuing
to send me stories.
JOHN YANG: What do you think
this says about
our culture, that there is so
much response
to this?
KELLY OXFORD: It says that women
are being
abused.
It's such an overwhelmingly huge
problem that
we ignore it, as we often do
when things are
this large.
JOHN YANG: Professor Hill, it's
been 25 years
now since you gave your
testimony in the Russell
Caucus Room up on Capitol Hill
in the Senate.
When you listen to Kelly talk
about the response
she's gotten, what strikes you?
What's your response?
What are you thinking?
ANITA HILL, Brandeis University:
Well, the
first thing I thought was that,
25 years ago,
people actually said that they
had no idea
that sexual harassment was a
problem.
And I'm also -- but I'm struck
that Ms. Oxford
says that she understands and
knows about
this problem, you know, of
sexual assault,
because when the wave of
students started
protesting the problem on
college campuses,
people, detractors accused them
of inflating
the numbers of assaults that
women experience.
And I think the great service of
this hashtag
is to get these stories out, so
that we can
debunk this idea that this is an
infrequent
problem, and that it's not, in
fact, quite
severe and quite pervasive.
JOHN YANG: And, Professor, you
say, 25 years
ago, people -- it really did
spark some of
the first discussions about
sexual harassment
in the workplace and in other
places.
The kind of response that Ms.
Oxford is getting,
how does that compare to the
kind of response
you were getting?
ANITA HILL: Well, we didn't have
social media
25 years ago.
And so most of what I got were
letters.
I got a lot of letters, and I
still get them.
And the problems and the
behaviors range from
verbal sexual harassment to
physical assaults,
whether it's in the workplace or
on the streets
or in schools.
So this is really a social
problem.
It can appear in any arena.
I think the response also is
different in
terms of people saying, be much
more skeptical.
I think people may not know the
extent of
sexual assault, but I think,
after this discussion
is over, I hope that at least
people will
not deny that it happens at all.
And I also hope that, when we
start talking
about these issues, that we can
start from
a premise that women are valued
as much as
the men who accost and assault
them.
And that has not always been the
premise.
JOHN YANG: Mike, it's being
dismissed -- or
Donald Trump and his supporters
are just saying
this is locker room talk.
MIKE WISE, ESPN: Yes.
JOHN YANG: You're a
sportswriter.
You have been in locker rooms, a
lot of locker
rooms, over the years.
MIKE WISE: Yes.
JOHN YANG: Is this locker room
talk?
MIKE WISE: Well, none of the
ball players
I know, maybe other than Bill
Bradley, were
actually running for office.
So, we might expect more of our
leaders.
But I think locker room talk is
an awful excuse
in some ways.
Saying it's just locker room
talk are like
the people that commit crimes
and say, he's
only human.
Well, that means you have a
larger neural
cortex than most animals that
operate on instincts.
And so I think we need to get
out of this
locker room talk culture.
I don't think it's as pervasive
as it used
to be.
But, still, I have heard some of
the filth,
misogyny, racism, crude jokes
that went beyond
dirty.
And so I think, until we address
that problem,
that it's just locker room talk,
well, no,
it's where you worship arrested
development.
You're still a boy.
Let's all get into the 21st
century and become
men.
JOHN YANG: Kelly Oxford, what
about that?
Is there a danger in dismissing
it as locker
room talk, as saying that there
are places
where this is acceptable?
KELLY OXFORD: Yes.
No, it's not acceptable
anywhere.
Women have only had the vote for
less than
100 years.
Before that, we were wives and
essentially
kind of property.
We grew up, and our parents
wanted us to get
married, so somebody else could
look after
us.
And in the last few decades,
it's changed.
We can now have families without
men.
But, unfortunately, the
dialogue, the old
boys club, the locker room talk,
has mysteriously
not changed at all.
JOHN YANG: Professor Hill,
what's your take
on that?
ANITA HILL: Well, and I would
just say -- well,
I would just say to this idea
that it's just
locker room talk, I think that's
just another
one of those lame excuses that
are given.
In other words, you could say,
oh, it was
just a joke, or, you know, can't
you take
a joke, or it really wasn't that
hard, it
wasn't all that bad.
And it's just a way of
diminishing the value
of women and excusing illegal
behavior.
And so I don't know that anyone
actually takes
that seriously, but I do hear
over and over
people saying, well, it was just
this or it's
just that, as though it's the
woman's fault
for complaining about being
sexually assaulted.
And so I think, again, what we
have to go
back and think about is, from
whose perspective
are we going to move forward on
this?
Are we going to continue to use
language like
this to protect abusers?
Are we going to continue to give
them slaps
on the wrist, when we know that
they have
committed these acts?
Or are we actually going to
value women in
the way we say we do and punish
people when
they participate in what is
severe and pervasive
and an extensive problem?
MIKE WISE: Professor Hill hits
it right on
the head, John, that if we don't
get into
a culture of examining how this
is wrong,
when you go to a debate a few
days later,
and you show up on the stage and
your first
response is, it's just words, I
think that's
very dangerous.
And I think, while there are a
lot of people
out -- I don't -- I would never
mitigate anybody
who commits sexual assault, but
I would say
that those people will be found
out eventually.
In some ways, I'm really more
worried about
the enabling culture we have
that it's so
permissive to say these things
and to say,
oh, we're too politically
correct today.
And until we get into a mind-set
of, no, that's
wrong and the friends around you
that are
supposed to tell you what you
need to hear,
other than what you want to
hear, tell you
it's wrong, we're going to still
have this
kind of culture.
ANITA HILL: This is a pivotal
moment, though.
And the question is, how much
farther along
are we going to move?
Many women are harassed, one in
three between
the ages of 18 and 34, by one
poll.
And we need to figure out if, in
fact, we
are going to enable them to come
forward with
their complaints, as opposed to
enabling harassers
and abusers to continue their
behavior.
JOHN YANG: Where do you want to
see this discussion
go, Professor Hill?
You say it's a pivotal point.
It started a discussion.
Where should it go from here?
ANITA HILL: Well, it should go
really in spelling
out of, what is it like to
experience these
problems?
And that's why Ms. Oxford's
Twitter feed is
so important, because it's
getting it out
there.
It's getting the stories out.
And that was really important 25
years ago.
But it has also then become
embedded in our
policies and procedures in
workplaces.
Most women who are harassed
don't come forward,
they don't complain because
they're skeptical
of the process, or they don't
think anything
is going to come of it if they
are found to
have been harassed.
And so -- and we know from some
very public
cases that sexual assault isn't
always punished
even by the courts in the way
that they should
be.
So, we have got to figure out,
how are we
going to embed women's
experiences in the
processes, so that they trust
the processes,
that there are fair
investigations that get
to the truth, and then there is
appropriate
punishment when abuse occurs?
MIKE WISE: One of the things --
and I show
-- I want to show gratitude to
both women,
Professor Hill and Kelly, that
25 years ago,
Professor Hill didn't have the
same support
system that we do through social
media and
whatnot.
And she -- it almost became like
a pick a
side.
You're either on a prospective
justice's side
or you're either on Ms. Hill's
side.
And it was ridiculous in some
ways.
One of the disturbing things
about today is,
people like Kelly, they put
themselves out
there.
And a lot of times, they will
get revictimized
through some nasty tweets,
somebody being
snarky or somebody just being
vile and foul.
I think it takes a tremendous
amount of courage
today, even though the support
system is bigger.
JOHN YANG: Mike Wise...
KELLY OXFORD: I actually...
JOHN YANG: I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
KELLY OXFORD: I actually -- I
actually think,
you know, if social media and
the Internet
had been around when Ms. Hill
went through
what she went through, I think
she would have
had a lot of support.
I think that the fact that she
even got handwritten
letters and still gets letters
today is proof
of that.
It would have been so easy for
her to get
a message from a woman.
It takes two second online to
show your support.
And, honestly, the amount of
backlash that
I have received for this has
been minimal.
It has been almost all support,
almost all
women and some men telling their
stories of
how rampant this abuse is in our
society.
ANITA HILL: I would also say
that I did get
lots of support.
I did hear from women almost
immediately.
And it was hard to get in touch
with me.
I still have letters from
Western Union, which
I don't even know if Western
Union is in the
business of sending messages
anymore.
(LAUGHTER)
ANITA HILL: But I have faxes.
People made an effort.
But I still know that it takes a
lot of courage
to come forward and tell your
story, because
you really don't know what the
response is
going to be.
JOHN YANG: Anita Hill, Kelly
Oxford, Mike
Wise, I'm afraid we're going to
have to leave
it there.
We could talk about this much
longer, but
thank you all very much for
joining us.
MIKE WISE: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On our Web site,
columnist
Wendy Thomas Russell tries to
answer what
many parents have been thinking:
How do I
explain this embattled and
sometimes R-rated
election to children?
Go to PBS.org/NewsHour to find
her advice.
Finally tonight, special
correspondent Cat
Wise looks at how an
insignificant-seeming
bit of vegetation helped
scientists in Portland,
Oregon, discover air quality
problems in certain
areas of that city earlier this
year.
It is part of our weekly series
covering the
Leading Edge of science and
technology.
CAT WISE: Portland, Oregon, is a
city that
prides itself on its food
trucks, bike-friendly
streets, and being very focused
on the environment.
So, many people here were
shocked when it
was discovered earlier this year
that certain
neighborhoods had high levels of
heavy toxic
metals.
That discovery was largely due
to this woman
and her love of moss.
SARAH JOVAN, U.S. Forest
Service: Well, moss
is kind of like the underdog of
the plant
world, in the sense that people
tend to not
really know what it is.
CAT WISE: Sarah Jovan is a
research ecologist
with the U.S. Forest Service.
She and a small number of other
scientists
have been studying moss and
lichens in forests
for years to learn more about
air quality.
That's because moss and lichens
are essentially
little sponges that absorb
everything in the
air around them, including
pollutants.
But moss had never been studied
extensively
in an urban environment.
So, several years ago, Jovan and
a colleague
decided they'd do just that in
Portland.
And they chose a type of moss
that can be
found nearly everywhere in the
city.
It's called orthotrichum.
SARAH JOVAN: And what's
interesting is, it
doesn't seem to mind pollution
at all.
It's like the Twinkie of the
moss world, because
it seems really indestructible.
CAT WISE: Jovan's team took
samples from 346
sites around Portland.
They even climbed some trees.
The samples were brought back to
a Portland
State University lab, where they
were processed
and cleaned of debris, and then
they were
sent off for a detailed chemical
analysis.
The results that came back were
startling.
Moss from two neighborhoods
contained high
levels of cadmium, a metal which
can cause
a host of health problems,
including kidney
damage and lung cancer, if
inhaled over a
long time.
The cadmium hot spots, seen in
dark orange
on this Forest Service map, were
right around
two artisan glass manufacturing
companies.
And one location also had very
high levels
of arsenic.
Cadmium, arsenic, and other
metals are commonly
used in glassmaking.
SARAH JOVAN: We knew we'd find
some hot spots
of pollution, but we were
actually shocked.
We found that the largest hot
spot was associated
with an industry that actually
isn't regulated
for arsenic and cadmium.
And we said, oh, my gosh, you
know, that's
an area where there are schools,
there's a
day care, there's neighborhoods.
CAT WISE: But she still had some
big unanswered
questions.
Did the air in those
neighborhoods also contain
high levels of metals?
Was the moss acting like an
early warning
system?
So, Jovan and her Forest Service
colleagues
shared their results with the
state agency
actually responsible for
monitoring Oregon's
air, the Department of
Environmental Quality.
SARAH ARMITAGE, Oregon Senior
Air Quality
Planner: To really know what
people are breathing,
we need to take these pieces of
equipment
out and run air through the
filter, and then
bring it back and analyze it.
CAT WISE: Sarah Armitage is a
senior air quality
planner for the state.
She showed us some of the
sophisticated air
monitors that the agency
deployed around the
glass companies after they were
given the
moss study results.
Samples taken from those
monitors, which were
processed in this state lab,
eventually confirmed
that the air was indeed tainted.
In some areas, cadmium levels
were nearly
50 times above state health
benchmarks, and
arsenic were more than 150 times
over.
The state had known for a number
of years
that there were elevated levels
of certain
metals in Portland's air, but
they were never
able to pinpoint the sources.
Prior to the moss study, there
was just one
permanent air monitor in
Portland and air
pollution was tracked on a
regional scale,
not neighborhood by
neighborhood.
Why?
SARAH ARMITAGE: Cost.
That's really the reason.
They are expensive to operate
and to purchase
and to do the analysis.
An average site is about
$150,000 per year.
But when we have the moss data,
at least for
metals, it screens a broad area,
and we can
zero in on a location where we
know, if we
put a monitor, we're going to
find some metals.
CAT WISE: But, costs aside, more
air monitors
simply weren't required.
Under the federal Clean Air Act,
six common
pollutants that cause smog and
health problems
have strict, enforceable
emissions standards;
187 other pollutants, called air
toxics, are
also regulated, but they aren't
monitored
to the same degree.
And Oregon, like many states,
hasn't been
closely tracking industrial
sources of cadmium
and other air toxics or the
health impacts.
MAN: New concerns about high
levels of toxins
in Portland neighborhoods.
CAT WISE: When the story broke,
there was
a big public outcry.
Government officials held
meetings with concerned
residents.
And the head of the state
environmental agency
resigned in March, soon after
the moss results
were made public, though he
cited health concerns
as the reason.
But the glass companies, which
voluntarily
suspended the use of the metals
after the
results came out, and have been
working with
the state since to comply with
temporary rules,
were not breaking the law, says
air quality
official Armitage.
SARAH ARMITAGE: As far as DEQ
was concerned,
and also the facility was
concerned, they
were in compliance.
We take responsibility for the
federal standards.
We put them in facilities'
permits.
What wasn't regulated was the
furnaces that
melted the glass.
And that's where the emissions
were coming
from.
MARY PEVETO, Neighbors for Clean
Air: This
idea that there's this whole
classification
of air pollution that has not
been well addressed
by the federal government has
been a really
hidden secret really across this
country.
CAT WISE: Mary Peveto is the
co-founder of
a local advocacy group which has
been fighting
for cleaner air more than a
decade.
MARY PEVETO: As I have said, at
the beginning,
there was no credible evidence
to demonstrate
whether or not this company was
emitting anything
that was a problem.
CAT WISE: She gathered recently
with a group
of concerned residents who live
near a metal
manufacturing facility where the
moss samples
picked up elevated levels of
nickel.
The state now has air monitors
deployed around
that company too.
And Peveto says it's about time.
MARY PEVETO: All of us have been
really traumatized
that our state would knowingly
allow these
toxics to continue to be in our
environments,
when we know that actions could
have been
taken to reduce them.
These are the kinds of things
that contribute
to our health and disease in
ways that you
often don't recognize.
CAT WISE: In fact, public health
concerns
have led to some significant
changes.
When an air monitor outside a
day care near
one of the glass companies
detected a lead
spike in May, Oregon's governor
issued an
unprecedented temporary
cease-and-desist order.
So far, state health officials
say voluntary
lead and cadmium testing in the
community
has not revealed an immediate
widespread public
health threat.
But the long-term impacts are
still being
studied.
DR.
KATRINA HEDBERG, Oregon State
Health Officer:
It's always extremely difficult
to associate
one long-term health outcome
like cancer with
a very specific exposure.
CAT WISE: Dr. Katrina Hedberg is
Oregon's
state health officer.
I met up with her near the day
care where
the elevated lead levels were
caught.
She says one of the big lessons
from the moss
study is that better monitoring
is needed,
so that the public health
community can gauge
the actual risks from air
pollution.
DR.
KATRINA HEDBERG: I would say
that, when there
are more data, understanding
what people are
exposed to in various areas is
useful, because
that then helps us to determine
what the level
of risk is.
We need data in the environment.
Otherwise, it's only
theoretical.
CAT WISE: Oregon is currently
revising regulations
for glass manufacturers, and a
major overhaul
of permitting regulations for
all companies
which emit air toxics is also
under way, with
more input from health officials
and the public.
For her part, scientist Sarah
Jovan is continuing
to monitor moss samples in the
impacted neighborhoods,
and she says she's happy that
moss is finally
getting a little more respect
these days.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Portland,
Oregon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Current testing
by the state
of Oregon finds levels of
airborne heavy metals
detected by the moss have
dropped substantially
over the past year, since
measures were taken
to reduce their emission.
And a news update.
Late today: The New York Times
reported on
two women who allege Donald
Trump touched
them inappropriately in a manner
similar to
what he described in the 2005
"Access Hollywood"
video.
And that is the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.